Digital Signatures             
==================================

## Introduction
Assume we have two communicating parties, Alice and Bob, who share a secret key $\mathsf{k}$. Furthermore, the secret key is used for encryption with a block cipher. When Alice receives and decrypts a message which makes semantic sense, e.g., the decrypted message is an actual (English) text, she can in many cases conclude that the message was in fact generated by a person with whom he shares the secret key $\mathsf{k}$. If only Alice and Bob know $\mathsf{k}$, they can be reasonably sure that an attacking third party has not changed the message in transit. 

They cannot be 100 percent sure because some block cipher can are *malleable*. To solve the malleability problem, suppose that Alice and Bob agreed on using a "encrypt then MAC" based protocol.

So far we’ve always assumed that the bad guy is an external party that we often named Oscar. However, in practice it is often the case that Alice and Bob do want to communicate securely with each other, but at the same time they might be interested in cheating each other. It turns out that symmetric-key schemes do not protect the two parties against each other.

There are many, many situations where it is important to prove to a neutral third party, i.e., a person acting as a judge, that one of two (or more) parties generated a message. By proving we mean that the judge can conclude without doubt who has generated the message, even if all parties are potentially dishonest. Why can’t we use some (complicated) symmetric-key scheme to achieve this goal? The high-level explanation is simple: exactly because we have a symmetric set-up, Alice and Bob have the same knowledge (namely of keys) and thus the same capabilities. Everything that Alice can do it can be done by Bob, too. Thus, a neutral third party cannot distinguish whether a certain  cryptographic operation was performed by Alice or by Bob or by both. Generally speaking, the solution to this problem lies in public-key cryptography. The asymmetric set-up that is inherent in public-key algorithms might potentially enable a judge to distinguish between actions that only one person can perform (namely the person in possession of the private key), and those that can be done by both (namely computations involving the public key). It turns out that digital signatures are public-key algorithms which have the properties that are needed to resolve a situation of cheating participants.

## Principles of Digital Signatures

