# Exercise 1

With reference to hash functions:

1. Provide the definition of the pre-image resistance, second-preimage resistance and collision resistance properties;

2. Argue about the relevance of these properties w.r.t. to a digital signature scheme;

3. Argue about the security of hash functions with respect to black box attacks.

## Solution

**Hash function**: $\mathsf{H() : \{0,1\}^{\star} \rightarrow \{0,1\}^{n}}$

**Pre-image resistance** - Let $\mathsf{H()}$ be a hash function. $\mathsf{H()}$ is said to be pre-image resistant if, for any $\mathsf{y \in \{0,1\}^{n}}$, it is computationally infeasible to find $\mathsf{x}$ such that $\mathsf{H(x) = y}$. In other words, $\mathsf{H()}$ is pre-image resistant if it is difficult to find the inverse function $\mathsf{H^{-1}()}$.

**Second pre-image resistance** - Let $\mathsf{H()}$ be a hash function. Given any $\mathsf{x_{1} \in \{0,1\}^{\star}}$, it is computationally infeasible to find $\mathsf{x_{2} \in \{0,1\}^{\star}}$, $\mathsf{x_{1} \neq x_{2}}$, such that $\mathsf{H(x_1) = H(x_2)}$. 

**Collision resistance** - Let $\mathsf{H()}$ be a hash function. $\mathsf{H()}$ is said to be collision resistant if it is computationally infeasible to find a pair <$\mathsf{x_1}$, $\mathsf{x_2}$>, $\mathsf{x_1 \neq x_2}$, such that $\mathsf{H(x_1) = H(x_2)}$. 

Let us consider the following digital signature scheme: $\mathsf{\sigma = S(K_{priv}, t)}$, $\mathsf{t = H(x)}$. With respect to a digital signature scheme, hash functions:

- Don't have to be pre-image resistant. Given a hash value $\mathsf{t}$, we are not interested to find the message $\mathsf{x}$. The digital signature scheme provide itself the plain message.

- Have to be second pre-image resistant. Assume an attacker manage to obtain a message $\mathsf{x_1}$ and its digital signature $\mathsf{\sigma}$. If the attacker were able to find a message $\mathsf{x_2 \text{, } x_1 \neq x_2}$, such that $\mathsf{H(x_1) = H(x_2)}$ then (s)he could claim that $\mathsf{x_2}$ was signed and its signature is $\mathsf{\sigma}$ (existential forgery).

- Have to be collision resistant. Consider a malicious user who needs to sign a message $\mathsf{x_1}$ = `Send 100$ to Alice's bank account ID=319462`. In order to authenticate herself, she needs to sign message $\mathsf{x_1}$. The malicious user does not want to pay 100$ to Alice. The, (s)he mounts the following attack:

    1. Consider the messages $\mathsf{x_1}$ = "`Send 100$ to Alice's bank account ID=319462`" and $\mathsf{x_2}$ = "`Send 1$ to Alice's bank account ID=319462`". 
    2. The malicious user start to add some "hidden chars" in order to modify both message's structures without modifying the semantic of the messages. The user will stop when (s)he finds two different messages $\mathsf{x_1' \text{, } x_2'}$ such that $\mathsf{H(x_1') = H(x_2')}$. 
    3. The malicious user can claim that (s)he signs message $\mathsf{x_2'}$, not message $\mathsf{x_1'}$ (non-repudation cannot be ensured anymore).

There are two types of black block attacks:
    
- Brute force attacks.
- Birthday paradox-based attacks.  

Let's suppose we want to reverse a hash function, that is, we would like to obtain the input $\mathsf{x}$ that produced the digest $\mathsf{y}$. The attack is as follows:

```python
def brute_force_attack(y):
    while (true):
        x = random()
        if H(x) == y
            return x
```
What is the complexity of the algorithm? It depends on the size of the output: since the co-domain has cardinality $\mathsf{Card \left( \{0,1\}^n \right) = 2^n}$, at most the hash function is able to generate $\mathsf{2^n}$ distinct outputs. This means that to find $\mathsf{x}$ such that $\mathsf{y = H(x)}$, it is necessary, on average, to perform $\mathsf{O(2^n)}$ iterations.

It is important to note that black box attacks represent only an upper limit. In other words, black box attacks tell us that we cannot do worse than that. Unfortunately, we cannot assume that the complexity of an algorithm capable of breaking a hash function is $\mathsf{O(2^n)}$ because we cannot assert with certainty that there are no more efficient attacks.

Consider a group of $\mathsf{t = 23}$ people. What is the probability that at least two people were born on the same day?
Solution: We can calculate the probability $\mathsf{P(E)}$ as $\mathsf{P(E) = 1 - P(Q)}$, where $\mathsf{Q}$ is the event "no individual was born on the same day as another individual".
$$\mathsf{P(E) = 1 - (1) \cdot\left( 1 - \frac{1}{365} \right) \cdot \left( 1 - \frac{2}{365} \right) \cdot \dots \cdot \left( 1 - \frac{22}{365} \right) = 0.507}$$

---

# Exercise 2

Let us consider the following secret sharing scheme that allows us to share a secret $\mathsf{x}$ between two non-colluding people so that each person alone is not able to reconstruct the secret.

1. Let $\mathsf{x}$ be a secret bit-string $\mathsf{t}$-bit long;
2. Generate a $\mathsf{t}$-bit truly random key $\mathsf{k}$;
3. Compute a share $\mathsf{s}$, s.t., $\mathsf{s_i}$ = $\mathsf{x_i \oplus k_i}$, 0 ≤ i ≤ $\mathsf{t}$-1;
4. Give the key $\mathsf{k}$ to Alice and then share $\mathsf{s}$ to Bob.

The candidate answers the following questions.

- Question A. Under the assumption that Alice and Bob do not collude, is the scheme perfectly secure? In other words, can Alice or Bob alone derive any information about the secret $\mathsf{x}$?
- Question B. What about if Alice and Bob collude?
- Question C. Generalize the scheme in order to share a secret among n users.
- How many key bits do we need to share a $\mathsf{t}$-bit secret among n users?

## Solution

A) To compute the secret $\mathsf{x}$, Alice and Bob have to collude in order to perform $$\mathsf{x = s \oplus k = (x \oplus k) \oplus k = x \oplus (k \oplus k) = x}$$.
Since both $\mathsf{x}$ and $\mathsf{k}$ are t-bit long as well as $\mathsf{t}$ is truly random generated and just used once, the scheme used to compute $\mathsf{s}$ is perfectly secret because it implements OTP (which is perfectly secure).

B) If Alice and Bob collude, meaning that they share $\mathsf{s}$ or $\mathsf{k}$ with the other, then the scheme can be broken, that is the secret $\mathsf{x}$ can be recovered computing $\mathsf{x = s \oplus k}$.

C) Define (n – 1) keys, $\mathsf{k_1, k_2, ..., k_{n-1}}$, and compute a $\mathsf{s = x \oplus k_1 \oplus k_2 \oplus ... \oplus k_{n-1}}$. Then distribute share and keys to n different, non-colluding users. Notice that we need the presence (or collusion) of n users in order to reconstruct the secret.

D) $\mathsf{(n-1) \cdot t}$ bits.

---

# Exercise 3

How the problem of delegation is solved in Kerberos? Describe the protocols for proxiable and forwardable tickets.

## Solution

Kerberos is an authentication protocol used to authenticate clients with servers within the same network. The protocol is based on the Needham-Schroeder protocol, as it relies on a Key Distribution Center (KDC). 

Let us consider the following scenario: Alice, a user registered to the system, would like to use a network printer hosted by a server owned by Bob:

- [**M1**] Alice requests to authenticate herself and to use the network printer to the Authentication Server AS. She sends to AS message M1 = {"Alice", "Bob", t, L, Na, WS}.

- [**M2**] Authentication Server AS, if Alice is registered to the system, "grants" to her a Service Ticket TS. The latter will be used by Alice to request the service to Bob. Message M2 = E(Ka, {"Bob", t, L, Na, WS, Kab}), E(Kb, {"Alice", "Bob", t, L, WS, Kab}).

- [**M3**] To use the network printer, Alice sends message M3 with the service ticket TS and an *authenticator*, i.e., a message encrypted by means of the session key Kab. Message Me = E(Kab, {"Alice", ta}), E(Kb, {"Alice", "Bob", t, L, Na, WS, Kab})

- [**M4**] To grant the service to Alice, and to authenticate himself, Bob replies to Alice with an authenticator. Message M4 = E(Kab, {ta, ...}).

Let's consider some aspects of the Kerberos protocol:

1. The protocol is designed to be used in conjunction with a login mechanism. Key Ka is derived from the credentials with which the user is registered to the Authentication Server (AS). The keys are as secure as the passwords chosen by the users. However, an adversary can mount a password guessing attack:

    a. The attacker attempts to impersonate a user by sending a request message to the AS. 
    b. Upon receiving message M2, the attacker decrypts it using the guessed key Ka'. If the decrypted message makes sense, meaning the attacker can correctly read each field of message M1, then the attacker can claim to have found the password.

2. Replay attacks are mitigated by using freshly generated timestamps ta. However, timestamps are not entirely secure. If an attacker were able to replay message M3 within the temporal skew accepted by the protocol implementation, then they would have successfully impersonated Alice.

Your text contains some grammatical errors and awkward phrasing. Here's a revised version:

3. The key authentication and key confirmation properties are fulfilled in the following manner:

    1. Alice believes that the session key is Kab once she decrypts message M2 (key authentication for Alice).
    2. Bob believes that the session key is Kab once he decrypts message M3 (more precisely, when he decrypts the service ticket TSb). Furthermore, Bob believes that Alice believes that the session key is Kab because she sent the authenticator.
    3. Alice achieves the key confirmation property once she correctly decrypts message M4: now, she believes that Bob believes that the session key is Kab.

4. The work station identifier WS allows the server to control which computers can use the ticket.

A user uses quite a few services. If Kerberos were as simple as the protocol we presented before, the user would need to authenticate (by typing their password) to each service.

The complete architecture is based on the principle of indirection:

1. Within the system there are two servers: Authentication Server (AS) and the Ticket Granting Server (TGS).

2. AS has the role to authenticate each user. TGS has the role to manage the tickets: an user sends a request to AS in order to authenticate her/himself and obtain a Ticket Granting Ticket (TGT).

3. Once the user has obtained a TGT, the user can ask a service ticket to TGS as (s)he were asking a ticket in the simplified version of Kerberos. 

4. TGS grants a service ticket to the requesting user. 

Let's see a more detailed version of the complete protocol:

[**M1**] Alice --> AS: Request
[**M2**] AS --> Alice: TGT
[**M3**] Alice --> TGS: TGT, auth(Alice,TGS)
[**M4**] TGS --> Alice: ST(Bob)
[**M5**] Alice --> Bob: ST(Bob), auth(Alice,Bob)
