# Exercise 1

With reference to the Diffie-Hellmann key establishment scheme,
1. Describe the scheme;
2. Argue its security with respect to a passive adversary;
3. Argue its security with respect to an active adversary.

## Solution

The Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange (DHKE) protocol was invented to be a secure key exchange protocol. The protocol is very simple:

- **Setup phase**. The legitimate communicating parties should agreed on a set of public parameters. More in detail:
    
    1. A large prime $\mathsf{p}$.
    2. A generator for $\mathsf{Z_{p}^{\star}}$, i.e., an integer $\mathsf{g} \text{ } \in \{2, ..., p-2\}$ such that its *order* is maximum ($\mathsf{ord(g) = |Z_{p}^{\star}| = p-1}$) 

- **Key Exchange**. Let's call Alice and Bob the legitimate communicating parties. The protocol needs just two messages to establish a shared secret key:
    
    [**M1**] Alice --> Bob: "Alice", $\mathsf{Y_{A} = g^a \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$
    
    [**M2**] Bob --> Alice: "Bob", $\mathsf{Y_{B} = g^b \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$

Both Bob and Alice must generate private DH keys $\mathsf{a}$ and $\mathsf{b}$ truly randomly and such that $\mathsf{a \in \{2, ..., p-2\}}$, $\mathsf{b \in \{2, ..., p-2\}}$.

Upon receiving message **M1**, Bob obtains its secret shared key by computing
$$\mathsf{K_{AB} = Y_{A}^b \text{ } mod \text{ } p = (g^a)^b \text{ } mod \text{ } p = g^{ab} \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$$

Upon receiving message **M2**, Alice obtains its secret shared key by computing $$\mathsf{K_{AB} = Y_{B}^b \text{ } mod \text{ } p = (g^b)^a \text{ } mod \text{ } p = g^{ba} \text{ } mod \text{ } p = g^{ab} \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$$

What should do a passive adversary to break DHKE protocol? Consider an attacker who can eavesdrop on the channel and obtains $\mathsf{Y_{A}}$ and/or $\mathsf{Y_{B}}$. As far as we know, to compute $\mathsf{K_{AB}}$ we should have at least one of the pairs <$\mathsf{Y_{A}, b}$>, <$\mathsf{Y_{B}, a}$>. The attacker can obtain $\mathsf{Y_{A}}$ and $\mathsf{Y_{B}}$. To obtain either $\mathsf{a}$ or $\mathsf{b}$ (s)he needs to solve the discrete logarithm problem, that is (s)he has to solve either $\mathsf{a = log_{g}(Y_{A}) \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$ or $\mathsf{b = log_{g}(Y_{B}) \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$, which both are "difficult problems" (there is not polynomial algorithm able to solve the problem).

Pay attention: the DLP is difficult under some circumstances (not always). There are a bunch of generic algorithm that are able to solve the DLP with some computations. Let's see them:

1. *Brute force attack*. As usual, one can try to enumerate all the possible elements in $\mathsf{Z_{p}^{\star}}$ in order to find the discrete logarithm. Complexity: $\mathsf{O(|G|)}$ (in DHKE $\mathsf{O(|Z_{p}^{\star}| = p-1}$).

2. *Pollard's Rho* algorithm. The running time is in the order of $\mathsf{O(\sqrt{|G|})}$.

3. *Pohling-Hellman* algorithm. It exploits the Chinese Remainder Theorem (CRT). The intuition behind is simple: the algorithm breaks down the DLP into "smaller" sub-groups of G. The running complexity is $\mathsf{O(\sum_{i} e_{i} (log|G| + \sqrt{p_i}))}$ where $\mathsf{p_{i}}$ are the integer factors of |G| and $\mathsf{e_{i}}$ are the exponents related to $\mathsf{p_{i}}$. The running complexity depends mostly on the order of the factors $\mathsf{p_{i}}$: if each factor $\mathsf{p_{i}}$ is small thus the algorithm is efficient! To ensure a security level of 80 bits, the smallest factor of |G| must be in the order of $\mathsf{2^{160}}$.

The *Pohling-Hellman* algorithm is efficient if all the factors of $\mathsf{|G|}$ are sufficiently small. But, with plain DHKE, based on $\mathsf{Z_{p}^{\star}}$, the *Pohling-Hellman* could be exploited to solve the discrete algorithm:

> Since $\mathsf{p}$ is prime, $\mathsf{|Z_{p}^{\star}| = p-1}$ is even: we have $\mathsf{2}$ as a factor. $\mathsf{2}$ is a very (very) small factor!

As with any public encryption scheme, the DHKE protocol is susceptible to various types of Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attacks. Why? Because the protocol lacks authentication!

Let's analyze the attack:

[**M1**] Alice --> Bob: "Alice", $\mathsf{Y_{A} = g^a \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$
	
- (The adversary intercepts message M1 and substitutes YA with $\mathsf{Y_{A}' = g^c \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$. The adversary controls c, i.e, (s)he generated it.)
	 
- Bob receives "Alice", $\mathsf{Y_{A}' = g^c \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$. Since there is no authentication/integrity control, Bob believes that the message comes from Alice, thus he believes that $\mathsf{Y_{A}'}$ is Alice's public 	key. Bob computes the shared secret key as $\mathsf{K_{BC} = (Y_{A}')^b \text{ } mod \text{ } p = (g^c)^b \text{ } mod \text{ } p = g^{cb} \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$.
	
[**M2**] Bob --> Alice: "Bob", $\mathsf{Y_{B} = g^b \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$
	
(The adversary intercepts message M2 and substitutes YB with $\mathsf{Y_{B}' = g^c \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$. As we said before, the adversary controls c, i.e, he generated it.)
	 
Alice receives "Bob", $\mathsf{Y_{B}' = g^c \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$. Since there is no authentication/integrity control, Alice believes that the message comes from Bob, thus she believes that $\mathsf{Y_{B}'}$ is Bob's public key. Alice computes the shared secret key as $\mathsf{K_{AC} = (Y_{B}')^a \text{ } mod \text{ } p = (g^c)^a \text{ } mod \text{ } p = g^{ca} \text{ } mod \text{ } p}$.
						
Whenever Alice or Bob sends a message, the adversary intercepts it and decrypts it with the respective secret key $\mathsf{K_{AC}}$ or $\mathsf{K_{BC}}$. Once the adversary reads what the encrypted message carried, (s)he encrypts it once again with the respective recipient's secret key.